GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: After decades, China
ends its controversial one-child
policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Thursday: Front-runners
relinquish the spotlight,
highlights from
the Republican
presidential debate.
GWEN IFILL: And dozens of
refugees still missing after a
boat capsized off the Greek
island
of Lesbos.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Wisconsin Republican
Paul Ryan became the 54th
speaker of the House of
Representatives
today. He's 45 years old, and
was the party's vice
presidential nominee in 2012.
Now he
faces perhaps his
biggest test yet.
MAN: Mr. Speaker, the
speaker-elect, Paul D. Ryan of
the state of Wisconsin.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: The bipartisan
cheers, handshakes and hugs all
made clear the new speaker is
popular with Republicans and
Democrats. And after taking the
gavel from Democratic Leader
Nancy Pelosi, Ryan
called for healing.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: The House is
broken. We're not solving
problems.
We're adding to them. And I am
not interested in laying blame.
We are not settling scores.
We are wiping the slate clean.
GWEN IFILL: That drew a standing
ovation, and Ryan went on,
pledging more transparency,
something rebellious
conservatives in his own party
and Democrats alike have
demanded.
REP. PAUL RYAN: We need to let
every member contribute, not
once they have earned their
stripes, but now. Let people
participate, and they might
change their mind. A neglected
minority will gum up the works.
A respected minority will work
in good faith.
GWEN IFILL: The nine-term
veteran, who until today chaired
the tax-writing Ways and Means
panel, said he wants committees
to take the lead in drafting all
major legislation.
Ryan ultimately agreed to run
after demanding unified party
backing.
WOMAN: Ryan.
GWEN IFILL: Today, he came
close, winning 236 of the 245
Republican votes cast. The
nine opposing him were
conservatives who had helped
force out Speaker John Boehner.
Today, Boehner bade his own
teary farewell, claiming credit
for ending earmarks and passing
a final two-year budget. His
last day in Congress is
Saturday.
REP. JOHN BOEHNER (R-OH), Former
Speaker of the House: I leave
with no regrets, no burdens.
If anything, I leave the way I
started, just a regular guy,
humbled by the chance to do
a big job.
That's what I'm most proud of.
I'm still just me. Real change
takes time. Yes, freedom makes
all things possible. But
patience is what makes all
things real. So, believe in the
long, slow struggle. Believe in
this country's ability to meet
her challenges and to lead
the world.
GWEN IFILL: Later, the
quarter-century congressman
listened as Pelosi and Ryan
saluted his service,
and then he slipped out
the back of the chamber.
Ryan's first major challenge
will be passing spending bills
to flesh out the two-year budget
deal that passed the House
yesterday. The deadline is early
December.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The commanders of
the U.S. and Chinese navies met
face-to-face today
via videoconference on tensions
in the South China Sea. U.S.
officials said they agreed
to follow existing protocols to
avoid clashes. On Tuesday, a
U.S. warship sailed within 12
nautical miles of a
Chinese-built island in a
disputed area. The U.S.
maintains the area
is international waters. China
warned today against any repeat.
GWEN IFILL: In Vienna, Austria,
talks on the war in Syria are
getting under way, with
uncertain
prospects. Secretary of State
John Kerry joined envoys from
nearly 20 nations today,
including,
for the first time, a
representative from Iran. Rebel
groups were not invited.
Meanwhile, a Syrian human rights
group reported Russian
airstrikes have killed 600,
nearly
a third of them civilians.
But, in Moscow, the Russian
Foreign Ministry rejected that
claim.
MARIA ZAKHAROVA, Russian Foreign
Ministry (through translator): I
want to stress that
such insinuations, whoever they
are coming from and whoever
shares them, they have nothing
to do with reality. We see them
as a part of that propaganda
campaign to distort Russian
military actions in comparison
to what we can honestly call
failed efforts of the U.S.-led
anti-Islamic State coalition.
GWEN IFILL: The Russians say
their strikes are targeting
Islamic State and other jihadist
groups. The U.S. says, in fact,
the targets have mostly been
rebels fighting the Assad
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Israeli forces
shot and killed two Palestinians
today in the West Bank city
of Hebron. The Israelis said
both tried to stab soldiers. The
incidents led to clashes
in Hebron between Palestinian
youths and Israeli forces. It
was another sign that a surge of
violence in Jerusalem
is now spreading.
GWEN IFILL: A U.N. committee on
international aviation standards
has rejected a ban on shipping
rechargeable batteries on
passenger planes. That's despite
evidence they're a fire hazard.
It was widely reported today
that the committee voted 11-7
against a ban. The U.S., along
with pilots and plane
manufacturers, favored the
prohibition. The battery
industry argued
against it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In economic news,
Deutsche Bank announced big cuts
to its work force
in eliminating 35,000 jobs,
mostly by selling some of its
businesses. That follows heavy
losses in the third quarter.
Germany's largest lender has had
to pay heavy fines and legal
settlements over rigging a
benchmark interest rate.
GWEN IFILL: And U.S. growth hit
the skids in the third quarter.
It came in at 1.5 percent,
less than half the number for
the second quarter. That didn't
do much for the mood on Wall
Street.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 23 points to close below
17756. The Nasdaq fell 21
points,
and the S&P 500 slipped a point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
China reverses its one-child
policy; true or false? -- we
fact check the Republican
debate; the search for migrant
survivors off the coast of
Greece,
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to a
massive shift in China.
Earlier today, its ruling
Communist Party announced a turn
from its
more-than-three-decades-old
restriction on the number of
children couples can have.
Lucy Watson of Independent
Television News reports from
Beijing.
LUCY WATSON: China's one-child
policy is changing, and the end
of its brutal intrusion into
family
life is nigh. Couples will now
be allowed two children. For
more than 35 years, the
one-child rule has been
enforced by punishing families.
BAI XIO LING, Mother: (through
translator): When they fired me
for having a second baby,
we were almost too poor to feed
ourselves. We were beaten up for
campaigning for my daughter's
life. But nobody
would listen to us.
LUCY WATSON: Bai Xio Ling dared
to have two daughters, Li Bing
(ph) and Li Xue, two sisters
eight years apart. One exists
according to Chinese law. The
other doesn't, just because
she came second.
LI XUE, China (through
translator): I was born in
China. I'm Chinese. But I have
no
rights. I couldn't go to school.
I can't travel. I can't see a
doctor. Nothing in my life
works.
LUCY WATSON: It was in 1979 that
the legislation was introduced
by Deng Xiaoping to curb a
then surging population and
avoid stifling economic growth.
Now a different demographic
crisis looms.
DU PENG, Renmin University
(through translator): A labor
shortage and a rapidly aging
population
caused by the policy undermine
economic growth. It's not always
good if the birthrate stays
low. We need a more
balanced model.
LUCY WATSON: But it could be too
little too late in a country
where the rights to have
and raise a child are
still being manipulated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Joining me now to
discuss the change is Mei Fong,
a Pulitzer Prize-winning
journalist with over a decade of
experience covering Asia. She's
the author of the upcoming
book "One Child: The Story of
China's Most Radical
Experiment."
Mei Fong, welcome
to the program.
So, just how significant a shift
in policy is this for China's
communist leadership?
MEI FONG, "One Child: The Story
of China's Most Radical
Experiment": Well, your segment
mentioned too little too late,
and that's really kind of what
it is.
For the past 15 years now, a lot
of experts of demographics,
economists, demographers,
have been asking for this change
to happen. They have all warned
of the aging tsunami
that's going to happen. They
have warned of the gender
imbalances. But the Chinese
government
has been very, very slow to
change it, so actually the
question is not why it happened
now, but why has it taken
so long to happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, why do you
think they decided now? I mean,
we heard some of the
reasons there, but what -- what
do you think has led them to do
this right now?
MEI FONG: Well, it's a looming
crisis that's affecting the
economic growth of the future.
Right now, there are about five
working adults to support one
retiree in China. That's a
pretty good ratio. But in 20
years' time, that's going to be
1.6 working adults to one
elderly retiree. That's a huge
difference. And there's not
going to be enough people
to pay in for all these pension
imbalances and support an aging
population that, if it
were its own country, would be
the third largest country in the
world after China and India.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
representative, Mei Fong, is the
story we just saw of that
family? They
had two daughters. And one of
the daughters is basically a
non-person.
MEI FONG: They call them
heihaizi, black children,
because they don't exist.
They're non-people.
There are about, estimated,
between 13 to 15 million of
these children that -- not
necessarily
children. Now some of them are
adults. But for all intents and
purposes, they just don't
exist in China. They can't
register to buy a house. They
can't go to school.
That girl that she interviewed,
I spoke to her. Her name is Sno
(ph). She is 20 years
old. She's never been to school.
She can't even get so much as a
library card, because
she has no registration rights.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will the
government now make some sort of
attempt to redress that because
they're changing the policy?
MEI FONG: It's really difficult,
because one of the big issues
that they fear is places
like Beijing and Shanghai.
Beijing and Shanghai already
have something like 18 to 20
million
people, city residents.
They are very afraid of changing
the household registration to
enable everybody to have those
rights, because they fear this
flood of people and there won't
be enough resources to service
20 million people in the city.
So it's going to be very thorny.
A lot of people have actually
been suing to have these
rights. This girl, for example,
she has been spending the last
three to four years fruitlessly
trying to sue the government to
give her those rights, which
legally she's entitled to, but
she's still not able to get it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What difference
is it thought this is going to
make in China's -- in the
decisions families make? I mean,
is it thought that many families
will now decide to have
a second child?
MEI FONG: It's doubtful.
Here's the thing.
Every country that's tried to
put in place population controls
have found it much more
easier to turn off the baby tap,
but when it comes time to turn
on the baby tap, there's
been virtually no country
that's been able to succeed.
Singapore, for example, which
China has emulated for many
things, Singapore tried to do
something
like this, although with a much
less onerous kind of population
planning policy. And now
Singapore is saying, please,
please, have more children. And
the Singaporean women don't
and can't and won't.
And I think China will face
similar problems. You know,
right now -- a couple years ago,
they loosened the policy a
little bit, but they found the
take-up amongst people who
are eligible to have the second
child was very, very low. And I
think this will be more
of the same.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
we will certainly see.
Mei Fong, who is coming out with
a new book, China's one-child
policy, we thank you.
MEI FONG: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: The crowded field of
Republican candidates took to
the debate stage for the
third time last night, this
time in Boulder, Colorado.
And by the time they were done,
the chess pieces had shifted
once again.
The face-off, on CNBC, was
expected to focus on the
economy, and, for a time, it
did.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: I'm not
worried about my finances, I'm
worried
about the finances of everyday
Americans who today are
struggling in an economy that is
not producing good-paying jobs
while everything else costs
more.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: We're reducing taxes
to 15 percent. We're
bringing corporate taxes down,
bringing money back in,
corporate inversions.
CARLY FIORINA (R), Presidential
Candidate: Big government favors
the big, the powerful,
the wealthy and the
well-connected, and crushes the
small and the powerless.
GWEN IFILL: But with 10
Republicans crowded on stage --
four others debated separately
-- it quickly became clear each
was looking for a breakout
moment.
For Floridians Jeb Bush and
Marco Rubio, it came when the
former Florida governor
criticized
Rubio for skipping Senate
votes to campaign.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Marco, when you
signed up for this, this was a
six-year
term, and you should
be showing up to work.
I mean, literally, the Senate,
what is it, like a French work
week?
You can campaign, or just resign
and let someone else take the
job.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: someone has
convinced you that attacking me
is going to help you.
JEB BUSH: Well, I have been...
SEN. MARCO RUBIO:
Here's the bottom line.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: I'm not -- my
campaign is going to be about
the future of America. It's
not going to be about attacking
anyone else on this stage.
GWEN IFILL: New Jersey Governor
Chris Christie also took jabs at
the now lagging Bush after
he'd answered a question about
regulating fantasy football.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate: Are we
really talking about getting
government
involved in fantasy football?
(LAUGHTER)
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE: We have --
wait a second. We have $19
trillion in debt. We have people
out of work. We have ISIS and
al-Qaida attacking us. And we're
talking about fantasy football?
Can we stop?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Ohio Governor John
Kasich lashed out at
front-runners Trump and Ben
Carson,
suggesting neither is serious
enough to be president.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate: We're
just going to have a 10 percent
tithe
and that's how we're going to
fund the government? And we're
going to just fix everything
with
waste, fraud, and abuse? Or that
we're just going to be great? Or
we're going to ship
10 million Americans -- or 10
million people out of this
country, leaving their children
here in this country
and dividing families?
Folks, we've got to wake up. We
cannot elect somebody that
doesn't know how to do the job.
DONALD TRUMP: And he said, oh,
I'm never going to attack. But
then his poll numbers tanked.
He has got very -- that
is why he is on the end.
GWEN IFILL: A running theme:
candidates who came prepared to
question the questioners.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate: The
questions that have been asked
so far
in this debate illustrate why
the American people don't trust
the media.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. TED CRUZ: This is not a
cage match. How about talking
about the substantive issues
people care about?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: I know the
Democrats have the ultimate
super PAC. It's called the
mainstream
media who every single day...
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE: John, do
you want me to answer or do you
want to answer?
(LAUGHTER)
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE: How
are we going to do this?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE: Because, I
have got to tell you the truth,
even in New Jersey, what
you're doing is called rude.
GWEN IFILL: The Republicans face
off again next in Wisconsin,
while Democrats debate
next month in Iowa.
Now we take a deeper look at
some of the candidates' claims
last night, from medical
supplements,
to gender and jobs, to
spotty voting records.
For that, we are joined by Angie
Holan, editor of PolitiFact, an
independent fact-checking
journalism Web site and a
division of The Tampa Bay Times.
Angie, I want to plunge right in
by talking first about Dr. Ben
Carson, who is currently
in many polls leading the race.
He was asked about his
connection to a nutritional
supplement
company, and this
is what he said.
QUESTION: This -- there is a
company called Mannatech, a
maker of nutritional
supplements,
with which you had a 10-year
relationship. They offered
claims that they could cure
autism,
cancer. They paid $7 million to
settle a deceptive marketing
lawsuit in Texas, and yet you're
involvement continued. Why?
BEN CARSON (R), Presidential
Candidate: Well, that's easy to
answer. I didn't have an
involvement
with them. That is total
propaganda, and this is what
happens in our society, total
propaganda.
I did a couple of speeches for
them. I do speeches for other
people. They were paid
speeches. It is absolutely
absurd to say that I had any
kind of a relationship with
them.
GWEN IFILL: Ben Carson says
that's total propaganda, that
question, Angie. True, false or
something
in between?
ANGIE HOLAN, Editor, PolitiFact:
Well, at PolitiFact, we rated
this false. He said he
had no involvement. Then he
said, well, some paid speeches.
We found the paid speeches.
Also, he appeared in videos that
the company created to promote
their products. Now, the company
was controversial because, in
2009, they settled a lawsuit
about
false claims, basically claims
that their supplement could cure
cancer. They settled
that.
Now, whatever you think of the
supplements, the company seemed
to see Carson as someone
who promoted them. They featured
him on their Web site. They
created these videos.
GWEN IFILL: He actually takes
the product himself, he says.
ANGIE HOLAN: Yes, he does, and
speaks very highly of the
product.
And the company only took down
these videos when The Wall
Street Journal started reporting
about it and asking questions.
So, overall, the claim that he
didn't have an involvement
with the company is false.
GWEN IFILL: Let's go to one of
the other many claims made last
night. One is from Carly
Fiorina, the former head of
H.P., who doesn't miss an
opportunity to go after Hillary
Clinton
on gender issues.
Let's listen to this.
CARLY FIORINA: It is the height
of hypocrisy for Mrs. Clinton to
talk about being the first
woman president, when every
single policy she espouses and
every single policy of President
Obama has been demonstrably
bad for women.
Ninety-two percent...
(APPLAUSE)
CARLY FIORINA: Ninety-two
percent of the jobs lost during
Barack Obama's first term
belonged
to women.
GWEN IFILL: Now, the key number
here is that 92 percent. What is
actually true, Angie?
ANGIE HOLAN: You know, this is a
funny claim for us, because we
have heard it before. In
2012, it was a talking point
that Mitt Romney would use and
the Republican National
Committee.
Now, back then, it was
questionable. We rated it mostly
false. But, back then, we also
didn't
have all the numbers yet for
Obama's first term. Now we do.
What we found when we looked
into the research was that there
were a lot of job gains in
2012. The trend that Romney
identified actually reversed
itself. So, there were job gains
for women during Obama's first
term, just over 400,000 jobs
gained by women. So, overall,
we rated this talking
point false.
GWEN IFILL: So, were they -- was
she just cherry-picking the
right numbers to use to
make the case?
ANGIE HOLAN: No, the numbers
were wrong. Once we had all four
years of Obama's first year,
there were not job losses to be
divided by gender. There were
actually job gains.
GWEN IFILL: And I just have to
ask you, when you go back to the
candidates and you say,
hey, we -- this is not true,
what do they say? Well, in this
case, what does she say?
ANGIE HOLAN: You know, we didn't
hear back from the Fiorina
campaign.
Now, she has been asked about
some of her facts in follow-up
interviews, especially
the television interviews, and
she often just sticks to her
points and doesn't back down.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's go on to
Senator Rubio. We saw a little
bit of their disagreement
about his voting record, but
let's listen to senator Rubio's
defense.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: In 2004, John
Kerry ran for president missing
close to 60 to 70 percent
of his votes. I don't recall the
Sun -- in fact, The Sun-Sentinel
endorsed him.
In 2008, Barack Obama missed 60
or 70 percent of his votes, and
the same newspaper endorsed
him again. So, this is another
example of the double standard
that exists in this country
between the mainstream media
and the conservative movement.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Now, the backstory
is that The Florida
Sun-Sentinel, his home state
newspaper,
says he should just quit the
Senate, because he's not showing
up to vote. And these are
the numbers he used
in his defense.
ANGIE HOLAN: We checked the
numbers, and he's right. The
senators who were running for
president,
Obama in 2008, Kerry in 2004,
and Bob Graham, the Florida
senator, they did have those
absentee
numbers in the ballpark that he
mentioned. Kerry's was actually
a little worse than he
mentioned.
And he was also right that The
Sun-Sentinel did do those
endorsements. Now, The
Sun-Sentinel
sayings: Those weren't our
Florida senator. You are.
I should mention that Rubio is
not running for reelection in
Florida. But when we looked
at the numbers about senators
who run for president, they
often have these high absentee
rates. Of the current field,
Rubio is leading. His absentee
rate is about 34 percent.
GWEN IFILL: When you do these
checks, and there are a lot more
on your Web site, and
you go back to them, does it
change behavior? Do we get truer
statements next time?
ANGIE HOLAN: You know, it's
interesting. We see the
candidates react in a variety of
ways.
Some of them don't change at all
and just stick to their talking
points. Others do change,
and I can't tell you that it's
any particular political
persuasion.
It seems to be more the
candidates themselves, if he or
she thinks that accuracy is
important.
GWEN IFILL: Angie Holan of
PolitiFact, thank you very much.
ANGIE HOLAN: Thanks
for having me.
GWEN IFILL: We will be checking
in with PolitiFact throughout
the campaign, as they examine
speeches,
ads and debates. Next month, it
will be the Democrats' turn.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
new round of health care
sign-ups, a new set of
challenges;
and a wandering author
finds her way home.
But, for now, the United Nations
Refugee Agency says 15 people
drowned and 38 more are missing
and presumed dead after a series
of accidents involving
traffickers' boats in the windy
strait separating Turkey
from Greek islands.
In the worst incident, which we
reported on last night, a boat
carrying an estimated 300
people capsized. Of those, more
than 240 were saved and brought
to the island of Lesbos.
As special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports, many of the
rescued are grateful to be
alive,
but also angry.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Emotionally
fraught from losing his daughter
at sea, this man from
Mosul in Iraq lashes out
at a fellow survivor.
MAN (through translator): He's
the one. He's the one who drove
the boat that sunk. You
all attest to that,
and you all know him.
MALCOLM BRABANT: U.N. Refugee
Agency officials intervene and
off-camera say the allegation
is likely to be unfair, because
the smugglers usually appoint a
refugee to steer the vessel.
The Iraqi, who left Mosul to
escape the so-called Islamic
State, went to the police to
press
his claims. The accused man was
briefly questioned, and later
released. Survivors, camped out
in the port of Molyvos, exuded
relief, exhaustion and trauma.
Not yet old enough to grasp the
miraculous nature of their
deliverance, children slept
or played. But this mother was
shocked into virtual silence, as
family reunification teams
tried to elicit details
about her missing child.
Accountant Anas Khaoula, from
Damascus, said the boat was old
and badly modified with an
extra deck that broke away under
the strain of the waves and
overcrowding.
ANAS KHAOULA, Refugee: We stayed
at the water, I think, three
hours or more than three hours,
I think, until the police came
to collect us. And there were so
many dead, some of them
dead because of the cold of the
water, and the others was
drowned in the boat when was
sinking.
And some of them don't -- don't
know to swim. They sink also.
And there were a lot of
children,
women.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The survivors
lined up on the dockside to give
their details to officials,
trying to collate lists of those
who made it, and those who
didn't.
The U.N. Refugee Agency
protested that people were dying
unnecessarily and called for
more
search-and-rescue resources.
Field worker Andrew Knight:
ANDREW KNIGHT, U.N. Refugee
Agency: This is one of the worst
incidents that we had in
recent times, in memory, in
fact, tens of people lost at
sea, just some of the most
awful stories, families, people
still looking for members of
their families. It's absolutely
awful, absolutely awful.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The traffickers
have adopted a new tactic,
increasing the price of a ticket
on a wooden boat to
more than $2,500.
Greek-American volunteer
Aphrodite Vati Mariola was
careful to condemn the trade on
the criminals,
not ordinary Turks.
APHRODITE VATI MARIOLA,
Volunteer: There's no respect
for human life whatsoever, in my
opinion. They just send them
away, and whatever will happen
will happen.
MALCOLM BRABANT: On this beach,
soaking wet youngsters pulled
from the waves were given
lollipops to comfort them after
their crossing. In the water,
almost every day, Briton
Philippa
Kempson:
PHILIPPA KEMPSON, Volunteer:
It's the last couple weeks, and
it's increased the last
day. We had a huge metal boat
with maybe 300 people on board.
Again, it -- well, it was
further out from the shore than
this one, so -- and it took a
lot of work to get them
off, but, again,
they were all safe.
I think they're just using
anything and everything to get
the amount of people across. I
don't
know how many people are
waiting, but they are using
every boat they can find now.
MALCOLM BRABANT: If this new
tactic continues, the beaches of
Lesbos are going to littered
with unseaworthy wrecks, as well
as the remains of treacherous
inflatables.
The traffickers are weaving
dreams that, for most of their
passengers, are unattainable.
They are sending innocent people
to their deaths. They are
causing chaos in Europe,
possibly undermining the
European Union, all the while
making a fortune.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Lesbos.
GWEN IFILL: You can find a
different look at the refugee
crisis online. Syrian
photographer
Nour Nouralla was visiting
Berlin and captured a rally to
support incoming refugees. Take
a look at her photos on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This Sunday marks
the beginning of open enrollment
in the health insurance
marketplaces that were created
as part of the Affordable Care
Act, as of this summer~,
9.9 million people who had
gotten coverage through the
state and federal exchanges
under
Obamacare. Millions more were
newly covered through Medicaid.
Heading into the new season,
there are a number of questions
and concerns people are asking
about costs, coverage
and penalties.
We're going to spend the next
couple nights looking at those.
Mary Agnes Carey of Kaiser
Health News is back with us
again.
Mary Agnes, welcome
again to the program.
MARY AGNES CAREY, Kaiser
Health News: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's start
out by talking about what the
administration's challenge
is here. How many people out
there are eligible, but have not
yet signed up for Obamacare?
MARY AGNES CAREY: The
administration says there are
about 10.5 million people that
are
eligible to enroll in the
exchanges, and they're hoping to
enroll about one in four of
those.
This is going to be a tough
group to go after. Maybe they're
confused about the health care
law. They may not understand how
it works or that they need to
have coverage, and so
they need to have a very
aggressive outreach for this
enrollment period.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's look
at one of those people who
present, I guess you could
say, a challenge. And that is,
this is a woman -- her name is
Angela Denig. She lives near
Miami in Margate, Florida. She
decided not to sign up for
coverage last year.
She said she was willing to pay
the penalty. She'd rather do
that. She ended up having
a health scare, and she's trying
to decide what to do now. Let's
listen.
ANGELA DENIG, Florida Resident:
When the open enrollment was in
2013, I went online to explore
my options, and when I plugged
in my specific factors and my
situation, I didn't qualify
for the -- for any subsidy.
So what it offered me was
coverage through independent
agencies, and the premiums were
significantly expensive,
something that wasn't in my
budget. So, at that point, I had
to
decide that I couldn't afford
medical insurance. Full-time
employment, I pay my taxes, I
pay
my bills, I live by the letter
of the law, and the letter of
the law said that year that,
even though I couldn't afford
medical coverage, I was required
to pay this penalty, and I
did. And it hurt.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mary Agnes,
what does the administration do
to appeal, to win over people
like this, who -- it's not just
a matter of persuading them. It
sounds like she genuinely
has an issue with the cost.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Right.
What they're asking people to do
is to come back to the
marketplace this year, to look
again to, to shop again. The
hope is that, in some markets,
perhaps in her market, that
there are more choices that will
be affordable to her. And they
also are emphasizing the
penalty. We have got to
remember, for example, the first
year, it was $95 or 1 percent of
your income, whichever
is greater.
That whichever is greater part
really surprised people. For
2016, that goes to $695 or 2.5
percent of income. So, while the
administration is emphasizing
they want people to shop on
the exchange, they also want to
make it clear that you must have
coverage, unless you meet
a hardship exemption and other
exception, and there is a
penalty if you don't sign up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And people -- and
this -- and people have to
really focus on this. They
have got to go online to
get that information.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's look at
another situation. This is a man
named Glenn Alder who lives
in Redwood City, California.
Now, he ended up buying private
insurance. He decided for
him that was the smarter thing
to do, rather than the federal
coverage. But he has found
the cost of premium, co-pays,
deductibles are also rising.
Let's listen to him.
GLENN ALDER, California
Resident: Before Obamacare, my
insurance had a fairly low
deductible,
had reasonable co-pay amounts,
and the premiums were at about
the same level that they are
now. At that point in time, we
had a family deductible of
exactly $3,500. And once we
fulfilled that deductible, there
were no additional payments
required from the policy.
Nowadays, the deductibles are in
the order of $10,000 for a
family. Every year, I see
the rates increasing in terms of
premiums, the deductibles going
up, and the co-payments
are going up. And out of pocket,
it is costing more and more for
a family, much, much -- at
a much more rapid rate than
the rate of inflation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mary Agnes,
what does the administration say
to someone in his situation?
MARY AGNES CAREY: They
understand the frustration about
affordability. And they also are
trying
to make it clear, as he makes it
so clear, that it's not just
about your premium. It's
your deductible, it's your
co-payment, it's this combined
package of expenses that
everyone
faces.
Chances are his health plan --
he lives in California -- they
all had to sort of rise
to the level of the plans that
-- the Affordable Care Act had
certain coverages they wanted
covered, so that's probably why
his plan is more expensive. But
consumers have to look
at the total package.
And this is where the
frustration comes in, because
that out-of-pocket expense, your
deductibles,
your co-insurance, your co-pays,
are all in addition to those
premiums.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is, of
course, the case with people who
bought into Obamacare,
people in the silver plan, for
example. They're having to look
at rising costs as well.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Exactly.
The silver plan is -- the second
lowest-cost silver plan is what
they call the benchmark
plan. That's what all the
subsidies are tied to. You are
seeing some increases, Oklahoma,
for example, an average
increase of 36 percent.
In Indiana, there is a decrease
of 13 percent. But the thing
that's important to understand
is that, even within a state,
even within a region, prices can
vary. So, that's why
it's important, even if you like
your current plan, you should
get on healthcare.gov or
go to a local in-person assister
or a broker, an insurance agent,
and look at what your
options are to see if you can
make a change that's more
affordable for you if you need
to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So how much
tweaking is the administration
able to do and stay within
the law as it was passed?
MARY AGNES CAREY: In the sense
of -- what do you mean tweaking?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tweaking in terms
of making adjustments for people
like this. As they
go along, they're finding there
are some challenges that they
didn't recognize originally.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Sure.
I mean, they can do a variety of
things. They're trying to
increase the number of
competitors
in the marketplace. That can
certainly help with consumers.
They're trying to make the
Web site faster and easier, so
when people go on the site, some
of the frustrations,
some of the screen crashes and
so on, won't be there now.
They're trying to make it as
clear as possible for people to
type in their information and
see their benefits and see their
potential coverages right there.
What does this premium
cost? What's my out-of-pocket
cost? What's the total package?
You can rank them from
cheapest to most expensive, to
simply make it easier for you to
find out what's out there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How confident is
the administration that they're
going to be able to get many
more people the sign up? When
you talk to them, what is their
expectation? What do they
say?
MARY AGNES CAREY: They're
expecting, of that 10.5 million,
that they can get one in four.
They know, for some people,
simply may not be aware of it,
they don't want to enroll
in it, they won't do that. Some
people may make the same
calculation as Angela did, that
it's too expensive for her.
But they're trying to go to
those people, who so far have
said no, they do an aggressive
outreach to try to at least make
them aware of what's out there
and what their options
are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Mary
Agnes Carey, we are going to
continue this investigation
tomorrow night with some more
questions as we move into and
approach the third enrollment
period for Obamacare.
Thank you.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Now: a tax break
that is coming under fire, one
used by hedge funds and money
managers, controversial because
of the way profits are taxed at
a much lower rate.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, explores what it's
all about, part of our
weekly series Making Sense,
which airs every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
PROTESTERS: Hey, hedge
fund billionaires!
PROTESTERS: Pay your fair share!
Hey, hedge fund billionaires,
pay your fair share!
PAUL SOLMAN: The Hedge Clippers,
an activist group targeting
hedge fund billionaires and
especially their
tax breaks. In the past few
months, the Clippers have been
taking their tools to their
targets'
backyards, like their March
field trip to Greenwich,
Connecticut.
PROTESTERS: Hedge funds, pay
your taxes! Billionaires, pay
your taxes!
PAUL SOLMAN: Their July jaunt to
the Hamptons, summertime
playground of the 0.1 percent.
PROTESTERS: We can see
your greedy side.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, earlier this
month, to the Midtown Manhattan
headquarters of Bloomberg,
where a conference was taking
place to -- quote -- "celebrate
the leaders and innovators who
shape economies."
PROTESTERS: Pay your fair share.
PAUL SOLMAN: But not in a
good way, say the Clippers.
PROTESTER: These are the
same hedge funds...
PROTESTERS: These are
the same hedge funds...
PROTESTER: ... that
foreclose on our homes.
PROTESTERS: ... that
PAUL SOLMAN: And what's
especially galling, says protest
leader Charles Khan, is that
hedge fund managers and private
equity firms get a special tax
break to do so.
CHARLES KHAN, Protester: They're
paying less taxes than
kindergarten teachers,
firefighters,
truck drivers, secretaries.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because of what's
known as the carried interest
loophole.
MORRIS PEARL, Patriotic
Millionaires: The term
originated from ship captains
getting
a 20 percent commission on the
things they carried, so it's
called the carried interest.
PAUL SOLMAN: Morris Pearl's no
Hedge Clipper, but he's a
kindred soul, having retired
early
from the Wall Street behemoth
BlackRock to run the Patriotic
Millionaires, a group that's
pushing to end tax breaks for
those who have amassed money, or
just inherited it.
MORRIS PEARL: I don't see why I
should be paying tax at a lower
rate than other people
because I happen to have the
good fortune of being --
frankly, being wealthy enough
to live off my investments,
instead of having to work.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's because the
top income tax rate is almost 40
percent for all earned
household income above about
$450,000. But the top tax rate
on long-term capital gains,
the profits from sales of
investments like stocks or real
estate owned for more than
a year, is only 20 percent.
And here's the rub: The people
who manage those investments
also get the capital gains
tax rate, because of their
supposed carried interest.
MORRIS PEARL: The carried
interest loophole is the most
egregious example of unfairness
that I have seen.
PAUL SOLMAN: Egregious, Pearl
thinks because, despite the
argument made by this private
equity video, money managers
aren't risking anything.
But, because they form so-called
partnerships with their
investors, they get to cut their
tax bill in half by reporting
their share of profits as a
carried interest capital gain.
The industry's rationale? The
managers are investing
something: their effort.
NARRATOR: The private equity
firm contributes sweat equity by
forming the investment fund,
identifying the companies to buy
and applying expertise to
improve the purchased companies
over time. When the private
equity firm sells a company, its
limited partners receive their
initial investment, plus 80
percent of the profits
thereafter.
The remaining 20 percent of the
profits goes to the private
equity firm. This is called
a carried interest.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, according to
Patriotic Millionaire Whitney
Tilson, money managers like him
already
take whopping fees, and the
share of profits is really no
different.
WHITNEY TILSON, Kase Capital
Management: I'm just taking a 20
percent bonus, just like
the shoe salesman at Nordstrom's
getting a bonus at the end of
the year. So, why should
I be paying a much lower tax
rate than an average guy earning
a bonus? It makes no sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: Fellow hedge funder
Jim Chanos puts it more
colloquially.
JIM CHANOS, Kynikos Associates:
It's complete baloney.
Economically, I can tell you, as
someone in the industry,
there is no basis for it.
PAUL SOLMAN: But the private
equity industry says, we
streamline businesses, we
reorganize
them, we make them more
productive. So, you want to tax
us at a low rate in order to
facilitate
our rebuilding of
corporate America.
JIM CHANOS: And that's fine.
That's great if it happens. But
if you earn a fee for doing
that, that's actually
ordinary income.
RYAN ELLIS, Americans for Tax
Reform: It's not ordinary
income, and it shouldn't be
taxed
that way.
PAUL SOLMAN: After all, argues
Ryan Ellis of Grover Norquist's
Americans for Tax Reform,
this is all perfectly legal.
We tried unsuccessfully to find
a money manager to defend the
carried interest tax break.
RYAN ELLIS: Under our system of
partnership law, you do not have
to invest money personally
in order to derive a capital
gain from the partnership.
Public policy is all about, do
we want to have flexible
partnership arrangements that
allow for investment
partnerships to develop, allow
for the successful business
arrangement
to happen, and that treats
capital gains as they're
supposed to be treated, capital
gains?
PAUL SOLMAN: Ellis uses an
argument the private equity
industry makes in its video.
RYAN ELLIS: Let's say you have
two people that want to buy a
restaurant, and one of
them is a brilliant chef and he
will make the restaurant work,
but he has no money to
invest? And then you have a
money investor. They go 50/50 on
this restaurant. They eventually
sell the restaurant. Are you
telling me the brilliant chef
shouldn't benefit from the
capital gain, that he should pay
ordinary income tax on that,
that he put nothing into
it?
PAUL SOLMAN: But Morris Pearl
doesn't buy the sweat equity
argument.
MORRIS PEARL: Everyone else
invests their labor in making
money. I don't see any reason
why this small group of people,
who happen to be hedge fund
managers, should pay lower
taxes on their labor
than everyone else pays.
PAUL SOLMAN: Pearl is sure
partnership law wasn't written
to be exploited by money
managers.
And, in fact, there's a bill now
in Congress to exclude carried
interest as capital gains.
That has the staunchly anti-tax
Ryan Ellis worried, that it will
embolden tax hikers
to go after the capital gains
tax break next, and who knows
what else.
RYAN ELLIS: This is the camel's
nose under the tent, this is the
tip of the spear, this
is the Trojan horse. Whatever
metaphor you want to use, that's
what actually going on
here.
I think it is populism at its
worst and ugliest, because what
it's doing is picking out a very
small slice of Americans that
earn long-term capital gains and
saying, for you and only
you, we're going to raise your
taxes and tax you as ordinary
income. It's pitting Americans
against each other. That's
absolute class warfare.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: We have
seen a proliferation of
millionaires
and billionaires.
PAUL SOLMAN: And on the campaign
trail this fall, the camel has
sounded surprisingly bipartisan.
Bernie Sanders and Hillary
Clinton are against the carried
interest tax break, of course,
but even some Republicans have
spears in their tax plans.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: The hedge fund guys
won't like me as much
as they like me right now. I
know them all, but they'll pay
more. I know people that are
making a tremendous amount of
money and paying virtually no
tax, and I think it's unfair.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, is the carried
interest tax break toast?
WHITNEY TILSON: I think, at
best, 50/50 chance that anything
changes in the next couple of
years.
PAUL SOLMAN: The only plausible
hypothesis here is that people
who have a major interest
in the carried interest
deduction are influencing
politicians to not end it.
JIM CHANOS: I know that sounds
shocking, but yes. Anybody with
any sense of fairness in
tax policy would argue that it
shouldn't exist, and yet it
hangs on.
PAUL SOLMAN: Which is why the
Hedge Clippers will probably be
back in Connecticut again
before long.
This is economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting for the
"PBS NewsHour" from the
front in the war over the
carried interest tax break.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: the latest
addition to the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf, reflections on a
lifelong search to belong.
Writer Sandra Cisneros
chronicles her pursuit in "A
House of My Own: Stories From My
Life."
She sat down to talk with
Jeffrey Brown recently at the
Mexican Cultural Institute here
in
Washington.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sandra
Cisneros, welcome to you.
SANDRA CISNEROS, Author, "A
House of My Own: Stories From My
Life": Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this is an
unusual kind of memoir. You have
gathered up old writings,
and then you ask yourself, as
you say in the introduction, who
wrote these and why? I have
a need to know, so that I
can understand my life.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Well, I was
trying to gather my essays from
B.C., before computers.
JEFFREY BROWN: Before computers.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Yes, because I
lose things. I write things and
they disappear from my
desk, my life. I move a lot.
I wanted to gather them and put
them under one roof, under one
cover, so I could document
my life in a series
of snapshots.
JEFFREY BROWN: What did you see
when you looked back? Did you
recognize that person?
SANDRA CISNEROS: Yes and no. I
saw someone who was very
innocent and trusting and
believed
everything family told her. So,
I was a little more suspicious
now. And, like everyone, I
change my mind.
JEFFREY BROWN: You come from the
kind of conservative
Mexican-American family in
Chicago. It's interesting
that so many of these stories do
involve travels and leaving, and
yet the main theme and even
in the title house, right, home.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Yes.
Well, when you're an immigrant
writer, or an immigrant, you're
not always welcome to
this country unless you're the
right immigrant. If you have a
Mexican accent, people look
at you like, you know, where do
you come from and why don't you
go back to where you came
from?
So, even though I was born in
the United States, I never felt
at home in the United States.
I never felt at home until I
moved to the Southwest, where,
you know, there's a mix
of my culture with the U.S.
culture, and that was why I
lived in Texas for 25 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: And that
unsettledness, though, comes
through in these essays, these
vignettes,
these Polaroids that
you talked about.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because you're
always sort of -- you're
crossing borders. You're living
in different homes that
aren't quite home.
SANDRA CISNEROS: That's
right. That's right.
And it was only when I arrived
at a landscape in the Southwest
with the big skies, like
in the old black-and-white
Mexican movies, that I felt,
yes, this feels like home, when
I heard Spanish alongside
English, that I said, this feels
like home. And even now,
I live in a town where you hear
English as much as you hear
Spanish. I live in San Miguel
de Allende.
JEFFREY BROWN: I want to come
back to San Miguel, but, first,
I want to ask you about
the house, the original house of
your writing career, "The House
on Mango Street," which
sort of set you on your way,
right? Did it also define and
confine you?
SANDRA CISNEROS: Well, you know
what? People know me from my
first book, but I don't mind
that. That's my child.
That's my first-born child.
And I have written many other
books since then, and people
love my first-born child,
but it's been around on the
planet longer than others, so
people have had more time
to work with that one. And I
don't feel restricted or
constricted with that book.
I feel as if it's my eldest
child and he went to work and is
earning money for his mom,
and that's perfectly fine, so I
can take care of the other kids.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: That's a
good child to have. Right?
SANDRA CISNEROS:
It's a good child.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're also in
these essays very candid about
traumas along the way,
depression,
even after the great success of
"The House on Mango Street." So
it wasn't an easy road.
SANDRA CISNEROS: No.
And people think that "House"
was an overnight success, but
that night was a 10-year night.
JEFFREY BROWN: And
along the way?
SANDRA CISNEROS: A lot of
doubts, a lot of sadnesses,
because I didn't have things
that
other people had. I didn't have
the car or the health insurance
or the house that other
people had. There was a lot of
doubts of whether I was making
the right choices.
I didn't marry. I didn't have
children. I followed the food
supply for jobs. I kept
writing at night. And that kept
me moving. It kept my life
disruptive. It broke up many
relationships. Was
it worth it? Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, I mean,
that's actually what -- that's
the totality of your documents,
the life of a writer or the
writer that you became.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Well, I didn't
intend to be writing -- the
writer's life. I was just
writing what came to me at the
time, but it is a map of how
this writer had to break many
barriers to find, not a room of
her own, but a house of her own.
JEFFREY BROWN: And where did
that ambition come from, to make
a life as a writer?
SANDRA CISNEROS: You know, I
think I didn't know what I was
creating, as much as I knew
what I didn't want to do. And I
didn't want my mother's life.
She was an unhappy, frustrated
artist who always dreamed of a
life that was never going to be
hers.
I didn't want to be married with
seven kids and wish, oh, if only
I had done this. I didn't
want that. So, my dream was to
mother a book. That was first
and foremost since I was 11
years old. And I just didn't
know how to do that, because no
one in my family had any
connections or a clue of how to
do that, so I just kind of
fumbled my way through it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And now
you are in Mexico.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Yes, I'm
living the writer's life.
JEFFREY BROWN: Crossing the
border, living a writer's life
in Mexico, but crossing the
border back.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Yes.
Well, my ancestors were from
there. A hundred years ago, they
fled in the 1915, during the
revolution. And 100 years later,
I have meandered back. I like to
think they called me back.
And I like to think that my
entire life was leading up to
this moment of me moving back
and being reborn, because it's
kind of like a rebirth, to be
back there and walking the
streets that possibly grand
ancestors walked. It's really
great.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
The new book is "A House of My
Own: Stories From My Life."
Sandra Cisneros,
thank you so much.
SANDRA CISNEROS: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: And now to our
"NewsHour" Shares, something
that caught our eye that might
be
of interest to you, too.
Local PBS station WGBH Boston
found this doctor, on the
street, showing his moves to
raise
money for charity.
TINA MARTIN, WGBH: He's not
exactly Michael Jackson, or even
Tito, Dr. Adnan Khera has
the moves that draw a crowd
everywhere he goes. He's an
anesthesiologist at Tufts
Medical
Center, and a dancing sensation.
We followed Dr. Khera to
downtown Crossing, where he set
up shop to dance for charity.
DR. ADNAN KHERA, Tufts Medical
Center: What I want to do is
kind of spread the idea that
individuals can make a
difference and it's basically
through embracing something that
they're passionate about anyways
and use it in a way that is
positive.
TINA MARTIN: And how did
you come up with the idea?
DR. ADNAN KHERA: The idea
originally came up when I was
visiting Barcelona and saw --
there
was a lot -- there's a huge
street performing culture in
Barcelona, and basically I got
a lot of ideas in my head.
TINA MARTIN: Part of his big
idea, a white coat, a boom box
and a sign.
How much did you raise the
first time you danced?
DR. ADNAN KHERA: The first time
I danced, I raised, I think,
$245, roughly.
TINA MARTIN: Two hundred and
forty-five dollars has grown to
about $12,000 since May. He's
given to dozens of charities.
There's no question about Dr.
Khera's commitment or his
stamina. He boogied for two
hours straight
while we were there, and does
it several times a week.
MAN: He's looking good. You know
what I mean? Dripping some
sweat, never a bad thing.
TINA MARTIN: The money poured in
and some were even inspired to
get into the groove.
MAN: Why not? Dancing's fun. He
looks like he's having fun. I
went to give him a dollar
donation, so I just couldn't
help myself, actually.
TINA MARTIN: Whether people
gave, danced or just watched,
it's clear they noticed.
DR. ADNAN KHERA: A lot of people
come up and just tell me I'm
doing a great job or that
I'm kind of doing the community
a huge service. And that kind of
goes a long way.
That was Tina Martin of WGBH.
I think we could do that, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He was
wearing his scrubs, right?
GWEN IFILL: We can do it. We
don't need scrubs. We can just
break -- bust a move.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: You can watch more
of our "NewsHour" Shares on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Visitors to New York
City may be familiar with the
popular High Line, an elevated
park built from an old rail
line. Well, get ready for
the Low Line, an underground
park that's being built in an
old trolley station. The park's
co-founders are also building a
garden inside the space, using a
system that collects sunlight
from the exterior. The park is
slated to open in 2020, but we
visited a prototype recently.
You can read the story on our
home page. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Gwen
Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.